Okay. You're all over it.
It's much more robust than these. I reckon.
It's got to be friendly for Auckland.
I'd be very-- Yeah, I don't really care what color it is.
I just want one that's built.
Which bit?
So you.
From me?
We can get you a red one.
Thank you.
Yeah, I think the butcher asked me. I have nothing against red, though.
He puts them over to the other side.
The whiskey is very nice.
Right.
Right, who's our first contestant?
Cancer Society.
Are you from the-- Oh, come up here, Josephine.
Right. Now we've got you.
We're here waiting.
Thank you.
Now, everyone's read reports, right?
And we read your report, which is a good one.
So leave a bit of time for questions. All right?
Yeah.
Okay. Thank you. Yeah.
Tena koutou katoa. Ko Josephine Guthrie toku ingoa.
Ko Kaiwhakahaere o te Toitū te whenua toku mahi.
My name is Josephine Guthrie, and I am the team lead for the Cancer Society
Central District's Cancer Prevention team.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
I'm here on behalf of the Cancer Society New Zealand Central Districts,
representing communities across Taranaki, Whanganui, Manawatū,
Hawke's Bay, and Tarāwhera.
Every day our teams work
alongside whānau, health providers and community organizations to reduce the
incidence and impact of cancer. We see
firsthand the harm caused by alcohol, harm that is preventable,
inequitable, and deeply felt across Aotearoa.
Alcohol harm is not just seen in the streets.
It is not just bottles and cans littered on the sidewalk.
It is seen and felt in homes across Aotearoa.
It is the stale stench of beer on the carpet after what people want to call one too
many. It is the sound of wheels sliding on the tarmac as our road
fatalities continue to spike after major events or long weekends.
It is the cold feeling of the hospital walls as we visit our loved ones on the
oncology ward. It is the hard slap of reality as our
mothers, fathers, grandparents, partners yell and scream
obscenities at us after just a couple.
It is the slow, sluggish movement after a big weekend, where our body
is just trying to catch up after giving it no chance to.
Alcohol harm is everywhere.
It is in everything. It creeps up and surrounds us.
And if this bill is successful, we see our country on a path of
destruction.
Cancer remains one of the leading causes of illness and death in Aotearoa, and the
number of new cases is projected to rise to over 45,000 a
year by 2040. Alcohol is a class one
carcinogen, and its links to cancer of the mouth, throat, bowel,
liver and breast is well established.
In fact, more than one-third of alcohol attributable breast cancer deaths in New
Zealand occur among women who drink fewer than two standard drinks a day.
There is no completely safe level of alcohol consumption when it comes to
cancer risk.
But the burden of alcohol harm is not shared equally.
Māori and Pasifika communities, young people, and low-income neighborhoods
experience disproportionately high levels of hazardous drinking and
alcohol-related cancer. These inequities are shaped by
colonization, environmental factors, and the reality that alcohol is
more available, more affordable, and more aggressively marketed in the
very communities already carrying the greatest health burdens.
For these reasons, we cannot support several of the proposed changes in the Sale
and Supply of Alcohol Amendment Bill.
First, restricting objections to license applications to those
living or working within one kilometer of a premise would silence many
legitimate voices. Alcohol harm does not stop at a boundary
line. If alcohol companies with no local connection can influence
alcohol availability, it is inconsistent to prevent community members with
genuine concerns, whether cultural, familial, or health-related, from
participating. Limiting objections risks excluding Iwi,
Hapū, and Whānau who maintain strong ties to an area, even if they do
not live within a strict boundary.
It also risks silencing people who understand the broader patterns of
health affecting a community. This proposal would widen an already
significant imbalance between industry influence and community participation.
Need I remind this committee that the act invites community objectors as a
mechanism for identifying and minimizing alcohol-related harm.
We also oppose allowing license applicants a written right of reply.
Communities already face barriers, limited time, limited resources,
and in some cases, intimidation. Recently, a license
applicant obtained a submitter's contact details and threatened
them by phone, later publicly attacking them and their organization on social
media, not once, but twice.
I am that objector, and I am one of the many community members that want less
alcohol harm at outlets in our neighborhoods.
I am someone who does not take a threat to people's lives who are standing
up to the community's health
lightly.Extending the back and forth process
risks making hearings longer, more complex, more expensive for
taxpayers, and more daunting for everyday people who simply want to
protect their neighborhoods.
Furthermore, we do not support removing the ability of district licensing
committees to decline license renewals that conflict with local alcohol policies.
LAPs are created through a robust consultation and reflect the will of the
community. Weakening their influence undermines local democracy and the very
purpose of these policies.
Research shows that higher densities of alcohol outlets are associated with
increased harm, including violence, hazardous drinking, and reduced community
safety. Communities across Aotearoa have consistently
expressed a desire for fewer outlets and less alcohol
advertising. If LAPs cannot be meaningfully applied to license
renewals, communities lose one of the few tools they have to influence
alcohol availability.
We also oppose allowing clubs to apply directly for on licenses.
Clubs can sell alcohol cheaply to low overheads, and cheaper alcohol is
strongly linked for higher consumption.
The World Health Organization identifies increasing alcohol prices as one of the
most effective strategies for reducing harm.
Expanding access to a cheaper alcohol moves us in the opposite
direction. Similarly, we do not support allowing hairdressing
salons and barbershops to serve alcohol without a license.
This normalizes drinking in everyday settings, increases exposure for
children, and creates safety risks for staff and clients.
It also blurs the line between hospitality and personal services without the
training or safeguards required to manage intoxication.
I honestly ask, what's next? What everyday errand
are we going to fuel with alcohol? Nail salons? WAFs?
The dentist?
Does the government seriously not see the harm that this type of
narrative is preaching to the community, to our youth?
I was teaching a class the other day to a room of teenagers, 16 to 17 year
olds, and as I listened in on their conversations after class, as teachers always
do,
I heard them discussing examples of them stealing alcohol and what their
favorite alcohol was. One girl said, "I love to get trashed on vodka.
That's my favorite." These teenagers aren't even legally
allowed to buy alcohol yet, but they are already conditioned and
surrounded by excessive amounts, and it's in their everyday conversation.
Why are we treating this like it's normal or okay?
We also-
That's okay. We're just about out of time.
Are we?
Do you want us to keep-
Oh.
Yeah, well, yeah, definitely.
It was at 10 minutes, wasn't it?
Yeah.
Yeah. Oh, sorry. I'm very sorry.
Hey, do you want to just quickly finish off? Because I've got one question.
Yeah, absolutely. In closing, our position is grounded in evidence,
equity, and the lived experience of the communities we serve.
Alcohol harm is preventable, but only if we strengthen, not weaken, our regulatory
environment. Every decision made in this bill will have the real
consequences for cancer rates, for community wellbeing, and for the generations
that follow. We urge you to prioritize health equity in the communities you
serve.
Okay. Thank you. I've got a question from Daniel Roseberry.
Thanks, Chair. Hey, great submission.
Thank you.
We've heard from some alcohol industry submissions-
Yeah
... that provide data that risky drinking is declining.
Mm.
Does that tell the full story when it comes to harm?
Because I see you both, your submission and other alcohol
submissions-
Yeah
... they've used Ministry of Health data.
Yeah.
And I suppose I'm interested to know what is the usual data that
alcohol companies tend to leave out, particularly for communities that are
still experiencing high levels of harm?
They often leave out the health risk of cancer related risks or the
other associated health risks. They see the harm within destructive community
or within just
bad behavior in community and how alcohol attributes to that, and they're seeing
that as less, because a lot of people are doing it in their homes.
And so yes, you're not seeing it on the streets, like I said, but a lot of that
harm is still on the inside. And, like I said, there's no safe
level of alcohol, so one drink can also attribute to cancer, and so
they can't honestly say that that's reducing if people are still having at least
one drink of alcohol.
All right. Hey, thank you very much for a very good submission.
Yeah.
But you're not arguing alcohol drinking rates are going up though, are you?
I can't attest to that. I think there's definitely
different data going on within the types and
amounts of alcohol that are being consumed.
Okay. That's fine.
Yeah.
Yeah. Just to be clear.
All right. Hey, thank you. Now we've got His Worship,
Mayor Toby. I see you're online.
Just Toby's fine. I don't need to be called anything special. Thank you.
There he is.
We've got 10 minutes with you. We've read your submission, but-
Cool.
Thank you for reading our submission.
And I'll be trying very brief in case you've got questions.
So, thank you for listening and hearing from me today.
And I just want to explain that Hauraki is a rural district
mixed with small sort of urban towns within our area, so we know it well.
We just want to emphasize the time that our council, along with our
communities, put into local alcohol policies,
that are working for our local communities and not some
centralized process going through them.
There's a lot of cost involved in that, and there's a lot of time and energy that
our communities put in for us to make those good decisions.
Our local alcohol policy should be exactly that, local,
and we want to ensure that it stays local and that there's no
other challenges. Like when we first had local alcohol policies
where progressives took us to court over the
opening hours needing to be 11:00,
regardless of the store that's here closes at 8:00 and has done
forever and a day. So we're going to take those processes out so we're not
forking up for those costs.
Since the changes that you made in 2023, they were seen
positively, and they strengthened our local decision-making and
reduced those appeal processes, and they offered favored, well-resourced
applicants from all members of our communities.Changes to that
will just weaken that policy and make it hard for us to enforce.
So we just want to
catch on that part there.
The hairdresser one, I've heard it before, and as you can see, I frequent the
hairdresser often,
and go in there and spend a bit of time in there.
But having that, I'm not sure how we can
enforce and monitor the process that's going on there.
And as the previous speaker said, at what point does that change too,
that you can just walk around with a bottle of beer in your hand at the supermarket
while doing your grocery shopping therefore.
So,
we would ask also if you're doing some amendments, if you could add an
amendment that the fees and charges related to district
licensing not have to go through a bylaw process, that we
can fix those in our normal annual fees and charge process that we do for every
other activity that we do at council.
So that's our submission, and welcome any questions.
Okay. I've got Todd Stevenson. Now, thank you for your
submission. Just in relation to the lo- I think, just want to understand how you
would deal with this issue, because the local alcohol policy, the issue is mainly
around your renewals, right? Where a business has been operating for a long
time in the community, comes up for renewal, but in the intervening
period,
the local alcohol policy might have changed, et cetera.
So
how do you pragmatically deal with that?
Because
basically you're
impinging on that business's right to operate potentially.
So I just want to see how you think we could balance up those rights.
So, for the Hauraki area, a good
operator shouldn't have any issue renewing their license if
they've not been through any process in the past.
But we just test it like anything else that we do with any other act that we
get from central government, no different than the Building Act or the Resource
Management Act. We follow the process and the guidelines, and there shouldn't
be any issues if those are all adhered to.
I suppose, just supplementary, but what if, say, if a school's opened near that,
just because of development or whatever, and a school's opened near that
retail outlet that's been operating for a while, how would you then deal with that
kind of issue? I haven't read your local alcohol policy.
Okay. So in-
Yeah
... in our local alcohol policy, so we haven't
discouraged businesses that are already operating near or close
to a school, but there's certainly a change if another operator wants to come
into the area and be within that close.
And we don't want an abundance of them, but we don't
make it harder by changing the policy for an existing user.
Okay.
And that's quite clearly in our local alcohol policy.
Good, thank you. That's useful. Okay. I've got Camilla Belich.
Thanks very much for your submission. Really helpful.
I suppose the thing that we haven't looked at in detail is the
suggestion you've made around an amendment to your fee structure.
I just wondered if you could expand that a little bit just for the
committee to know what you're requesting.
So currently, under the provisions that we've got now, to change the
fee structure for a local alcohol
policy, we have to go through the bylaw
process, which is a long, lengthy process that needs
community input obviously.
But of every other structure that we do, whether it's dog control, whether it's
building control, whether it's
swimming pool users or libraries or whatever, we set those fees and
charges every time we strike a rate.
And that's all that we're asking, that we have that ability to do that.
It's not about price gouging or trying to influence what
they're paying. It's just making sure that they're paying their fair and reasonable
cost of what it is to administer that current bylaw in that timeframe.
Just to be absolutely clear,
so you're saying the requirement to make it a change through the bylaw is
through the Sale and Supply Act, is it?
Yes.
Okay. All right. So it's something we can have a look at. All right. Cool.
Any other questions?
Right. Hey, thank you, Toby. They're very helpful and very useful
to have your submission this morning.
Awesome. Enjoy the rest of your day.
Okay.
You too. See you.
Don't drink too much.
No.
Right. Now, we've got
New Zealand College of Public Health Medicine.
Are they online?
They're online.
All right.
Cool. Hello. Morning, Professor Sue Collin, and I think you've got a colleague
coming. Good morning to both of you.
Hey, now we've got 10 minutes with you.
We've read your submission, but anyway, looking forward to hearing from you.
Morena all. Thank you very much
for this opportunity. My colleague Michael and
I are representing the College of Public Health
Medicine, a professional body of doctors dedicated to the
practice of public health. We have
250-odd
members involved in population health and well-being measures, disease
prevention, health promotion,
and so on. We're interested in this bill because our
members, many of them are medical officers of health, and
they see firsthand the
harms
caused by
alcohol and alcohol-related licensing.
As you point out, we have
sent you a written submission,
and my colleague will just present the highlights this
morning. Needless to say,
availability, increased availability is
unequivocally correlated with harm.
There's no question. The more freely available alcohol is, the
more harm it caused,
and the harms caused in our communities are uneven.
So we are strongly opposed
to this bill in its current form. I will now hand over to my colleague
Michael to elaborate.
Tena koutou katoa. Michael Portius, ko ingoa.
I am a medical officer of health, but here as representing New Zealand College
of Public Health Medicine. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and members of the committee, for the opportunity to appear
before you. I just want to note, according to the general policy
statement of this amendment bill, one aim is to, and I quote,
"Remove barriers to economic growth,"
by, and I quote, "avoiding unnecessary constraints on legitimate businesses
that sell alcohol." While this argument may apply to most
commodities, alcohol is an exception.
Alcohol is a psychoactive substance that is toxic to multiple organs and
carcinogenic, unfortunately, even at low to moderate levels of
consumption.
For example, a woman's lifetime absolute risk of developing cancer
increases from 16.5% to 19% with just one drink per
day.
So the harms caused by alcohol outweigh any economic benefits, including
contributions to GDP and tax revenue.
So in reality, alcohol acts as a barrier to economic growth.
Legislation that increases its availability is likely to reduce overall
economic performance
once the full social and economic costs are taken into account.
So Colin has mentioned that our main issues with this bill
are in how it increases availability.
It weakens community influence, and it further normalizes alcohol.
You would've heard the statistics already that economic analysis by the
New Zealand Institute of Economic Research puts that total
cost at $9.1 billion each year. It also mentions that's an underestimate.
900 deaths a year, 1,250
cancer registrations a year, 30,000 hospitalizations a year.
So just briefly digging into those three issues that we
have. So firstly, the bill weakens community influence.
Our biggest concern is the proposed removal of the ability of licensing
committees to decline a renewal application if the license
is inconsistent with the local alcohol policy.
That will make things more difficult for communities to address oversaturation of
licenses in areas, particularly high deprivation areas.
This will maintain the status quo of the high burden of harm that
we know from the evidence, so it's vital to allow licensing
committees to be able to decline a license if it is
inconsistent with community wishes.
Secondly, the bill does increase alcohol availability.
It allows certain restaurants to hold both on and off licenses.
It allows clubs to hold on licenses,
hairdressers and barbers to serve alcohol without a license, and there's
also exemptions to special licenses in relation to significant events.
So we do know from the evidence that restricting the availability of
alcohol is one of the most effective measures to reduce alcohol
harm.
Thirdly, the normalization of alcohol.
So allowing hairdressers and barbers to serve alcohol further normalizes
alcohol by embedding it in an everyday community setting.
Children also attend that everyday community setting,
and evidence finds that children exposed to alcohol marketing are more likely
to drink earlier and are more likely to binge drink.
So this proposal sets an undesirable precedent, which may lead
to further gradual erosion of alcohol regulatory frameworks.
So in conclusion,
the amendments that are proposed in this bill will increase alcohol availability,
weaken community influence, and exacerbate alcohol harms,
particularly for Maori
and those living in high dep communities already experiencing disproportionate
harm.
While there are some measures in this bill that we support, overall, we strongly
oppose this bill. We recommend the committee rejects the bill as it
stands. If the bill is to be progressed despite our concerns, we
urge the committee to seek evidence-based, health-focused amendments
that strengthen community participation and will meaningfully contribute to
reducing alcohol harm. Finally, we urge members of the committee to
support measures that seek to protect public policymaking from alcohol
industry interference.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members.
Right. Thank you very much, doctor. My first question I've got is Mr.
Dan Rosemore.
Thanks for that submission, and you just kind of half-answered the question in your
last sentence there. You raised concerns around
industry influence in alcohol policy in the submission, and also in
your oral contribution there. Do you think this bill reflects public
health evidence or the interests of the alcohol
industry?
Mr. Chair, thank you, member.
I think that if
the
amendment took into account
the latest medical and scientific evidence, it would look different
to what it currently is.
And if I may, I could pick up a point that was raised in the
first speaker. Unfortunately, the latest New Zealand Health
survey data for 15 to 24-year-olds, hazardous drinkers have
increased from, in 2024, 16.9%,
2025, 21.5%. Frankly, even if
that trend was in a downwards direction, we still need to do more.
It should be zero.
Yeah. Okay. Right. I've got Mr. Greg Fleming.
Yeah. Tena koutou. I'm trying to follow the logic here.
So if there's, and I think, and I quote, "An unequivocal link
between supply, increasing supply, increasing abuse,"
and there is, I think also, quote, "no safe level of alcohol,"
then logically you guys would be keen on prohibition?
So our position is not prohibition.
I think that what is important is that the public
and politicians and decision-makers know the full extent of
alcohol harm. Frankly, it's underestimated and
underappreciated. So it is a fact that there is no safe
level of alcohol. That's just an unfortunate thing with a carcinogen.
But why wouldn't you be for prohibition, just following the logic of those two
arguments?
It doesn't work
But I think we also have to take into account people's informed
decisions, and we have to take into account
the cultural environment. And I think that if we
advocated, if there was a law put forward for prohibition,
I think that,
Mr. Chair and members,
I don't think that you would think that would be successful.
And there are many things that we do that carry risk.
For example, every time we step into a car.
The important thing is for people to understand and appreciate that risk.
And
by some studies, the majority of people are not even aware that
alcohol is a carcinogen.
Yeah. No, I appreciate that. The point that I'm trying to make is that the whole
approach of this law is
founded on the fact that there is a spectrum for the reasons that you've just
outlined in the last couple of minutes, and that this bill is about trying to make
sure that we're in the right place on the spectrum.
But just within that, I struggle sometimes with absolutist
comments, which is what I've been hearing so far this morning. But thank you.
Right.
All right. Hey, thank you to both of you.
Good to have the medical side to that presented in a
compelling manner. So thank you for your contributions
again
with this committee. I appreciate that.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Right. Now we're going to New Zealand Amateur Sport
Association.
Ms. Coughlan.
Come on.
Have you got someone online? I thought you had someone-
Oh, no, we haven't now, actually. We've just-
Oh, you haven't.
We've come-- We're just here in person now.
Oh, right. Okay.
Yes, they haven't-
All right. Well, I'm glad you've turned up in person. It's always better.
Thank you.
Right. Now, we've got 10 minutes with you.
Okay, great. Well, thank you very much for your
time today.
The New Zealand Amateur Sports Association was formed in
2017, and essentially, we started with nothing,
and now we've become a national organization with reach across the whole
country and a very diverse range of membership
from kabaddi to rugby, to bowls, to netball.
So,
our vision is that
we have enduring and viable sporting bodies
which attract, engage, and build membership based on each participant and each
community's unique needs.
And we recognize that participation in organized amateur sport is
essential for healthy communities and must be a critical goal
for the well-being of individuals and, of course, for society.
And just a point to note, we don't receive any taxpayer funding from
government. We are reliant on the support of our members and
our commercial sponsors and our community benefactors.
And our purpose really is to focus on amateur advocacy, thought leadership, and
engagement. So, in terms of the bill,
it obviously removes unnecessary rigidity from the way licenses operate.
So I think that could actually be my phone. I'm sorry. Thank you.
Apologies for that.
No, that's to say that you should be here.
Yes. Probably a reminder.
We're watching your submission.
Sorry about that. And clubs will be able to
apply for a non-license rather than the only option of an existing club license,
giving them far better flexibility.
And as the minister noted,
under the current law, clubs holding a license can only serve members or
guests of those members, or members of clubs with reciprocal
rights.
Members of the public are unable to make use of those facilities unless they're
accompanied by a member of the club who's responsible for them on the premises.
So, obviously, she's pointed out that you can't have birthday parties and
fundraisers and all of that kind of thing.
And that is not really giving clubs much choice, and that's what we want to
enable them to have. So in terms of the bill itself, Section
17 amends Section 29, inserting the
words "and a club license" at the same time, and we are supportive of that change.
We want to be able to give clubs the opportunity to increase their
income by making their licensed facilities available to the wider
community for fundraising purposes, and in doing so, provide
these clubs their key social role in delivering sport to a wider group
of potential participants and supporters.
And we think the bill does potentially address
increased financial pressures being borne by clubs.
And I just wanted to
turn your attention to New Zealand Amateur Sports Association
National Sport Club Survey. This is a press release that we put out,
which has now been going for about six years.
And essentially, one of the key things that's come out of that is that the
rising cost of sport is now one of the most significant challenges
to community clubs and families across New Zealand, and that does capture
the experience of 150,000 Kiwis.
It's a partnership between us and the AET,
and it's conducted annually, that survey, and around
7,500 clubs across New Zealand are asked to participate.
It's taken online,
and we present those findings around the country at regional seminars.
And in fact, this year actually had a forum in Wellington,
which was very successful. So,
in general, we're supportive of the legislation, and
we just want to enable community sport organizations to be able to
thrive and prosper.
And,
I think that's probably really about the nub of it.
Yeah. Affordability is a key issue for clubs, as I've said.
So is bureaucracy and compliance.
So is governance pressures. Just getting people to step up and volunteer
is a massive issue. So anything I think we can do, including
the--
It's been great to get the support for the Incorporated Societies Amendment Bill,
which is still in the biscuit tin, but Laura McClure is sponsoring that, and that's
a great thing.Anything we can do to just promote
amateur sport, community sport, get kids playing sport, people joining
clubs, and keep those clubs being healthy and in good
condition is really welcome. So, yeah, we're supportive.
Right. First question from Mr. Tolley.
Thanks. I do have a question. Just before that, I think your colleague took some
photos.
Oh.
We just need to get permission for that.
I just want to-
Oh, great.
That's
Can we please put up our photo? We took some photos.
Just so we don't want to get you in trouble, because-
And-
You can't fine us
... actually, I have realized I haven't actually introduced myself- ...
or my colleague, so sorry about that.
So my name is Jo Coghlan, and I am here as a trustee, in fact, a
founding trustee of the New Zealand Amateur Sports Association, which
was the vision of Gordon Noble Campbell.
And I got involved because Gordon and
my kids were both at St. Pat's Town, or various children.
We had six boys there in total between Gordon and myself.
And, I got involved through the kids mainly being involved in rowing.
And Karen- ... here, has just joined
the trust, or the
association, I should say. And, yeah, you can introduce yourself, Karen.
Yes. Kia ora. I'm Karen Wright.
I'm a board member of Rowing New Zealand and have a great passion for sport and
education. I work in the education sector, so really happy to be part of
supporting community clubs.
Good.
Oh, my question. I didn't-
Oh, you do have a question.
You do have a question.
Sorry. I was just covering off a few things at once.
You're all right.
But no, and thanks. And thanks for your submission.
We heard other evidence in our last hearings about clubs
wanting to obvious- yeah, with the licensing changes.
And the example they were giving was
a funeral, like a club member maybe or someone close to the member
of a club had died, and they want to obviously use the facilities.
And I think, I suppose in the sporting arena, you actually would probably
sometimes even have members of particular sporting clubs who've passed away and
they want to hold the... So is that the kind of events and activities you're
envisaging would happen at-
Yeah, I think absolutely
... these? Yeah.
I think
a good example would be even be like the Wilton Bowling Club, for example.
It's a great place to have a function.
So anything you can do to sort of make it easier for places like that to be able to
do that, and then to be able to benefit-
Yeah
... from the
proceeds is great.
And that's, I suppose, like that club or the bowling club is a great example,
because I suppose they can use the facilities during the week for functions.
Absolutely.
Yeah. Okay.
Yeah.
Thank you. That's-
Yeah, definitely.
Right. Ms. Kurai and then Carter.
Hi. Thank you. My siblings and I are big
jocks, so we really appreciate the work that you do.
So at the essence, this is about making
sure that the clubs around New Zealand have enough funding
to continue. And so are there any other ways other
than selling alcohol that you think would be able to do that?
Like you said, that you're not
taxpayer funded, you're not government funded.
Are there any other ways that you can see that revenue would
support
staying afloat? Because we need sports.
I know. Well, I guess you'd have to ask the individual clubs.
But what the survey is telling us is it's just getting
harder and harder.
Mm.
So I guess, obviously there's fees and
club membership fees, and there are fundraising activities that clubs
undertake and-
So many
... so many, and it is just getting harder and harder.
So I think this is just one, why would you take this away, really,
when it's there and it-
Yes
... and those facilities can be put to good use and
everybody wins.
The community-
Mm-hmm
... is what sports does, doesn't it?
Mm-hmm.
And so
are there any parts of the legislation that you don't
agree with?
Not at this stage.
Thank you.
All right. Hey, thank you for coming this morning. Great to see you both.
Thank you very much.
Appreciate you coming.
Thanks.
Right. Now talking about sport, we're going to Stanley Bay Petanque Club.
Is that Jacqui?
Yeah.
Jacqui, are you there?
Yes.
Jacqui, are you-
Hello.
Oh, good morning. How are you?
Good morning. Good morning.
Now, we do have 10 minutes with you.
We've read your submission, but looking forward to hearing from you.
Okay. Good morning. My name is Jacqui Mockridge. Can you hear me?
Yes.
Okay. I am the president and duty manager of the Stanley Bay Petanque
Club located in Auckland. Thank you for the opportunity to address
the Justice Committee.
I wrote to the Honorable Nicole McKee, and she encouraged me to lodge a
submission.
I'm not part of a huge organization, but I do operate at the coal
face under the current regulations.
I would very much like the committee to explore how the following changes
might be implemented, and I know you have my submission, so
I would assume that you've all read those and are across the points that
I made.
I'd like to talk first about removing the need for a special license.
20 working days is a negative deterrent for a booking.
A hirer can't understand why a special license is required when you
have a bar sitting there, no matter how reasonably you explain it.
Mm.
This can open up the door for why can't we then
have BYO? BYO is not an attractive
option because it is more difficult to monitor the level
of consumption of alcohol if you are not serving over the bar
with a duty manager who is obliged to be present.
You are also not receiving revenue from the bar
for that event, only a hireage fee.
Hires of clubs are generally for weddings, birthdays,
anniversaries, or memorialsThey always include
catering. I've not had one hire yet that does not include
catering.
Clubs are a more affordable venue for people to hire
than going to a hotel, and particularly for smaller groups.
Corporate hires, which can include playing petanque, always include a
catered lunch or dinner.
The special license application process is heavy-handed.
For example, insisting at least three substantial
types of food is overbearing when a person can walk into a pub any
time and generally get drunk, walk out without touching a
mouthful of food. So why be so heavy-handed on clubs who are
legitimately trying to attract hires for events that will be
serving food?
When a party is booking for an event, they often have not finalized their
catering requirements or menus when we are obliged to submit
for a special license 20 days in advance.
It is my experience they are always over-catered, not under-catered.
You have a situation here where you have a club which has been vetted to
hold a bar license with a certified duty manager who
should be across the regulations and restrictions for supplying
alcohol and have experience in dealing with selling alcohol.
So why not put more faith in the system they have been
approved to participate in?
Clubs do not want to jeopardize their license.
This licensing process does not help restrict
alcohol harm. It's an administrative
problem. Does a restaurant need to get a special license
when taking a private booking for a function?
Clubs hosting a catered event are no more at risk for the
overconsumption of alcohol than any restaurant or bar, but
they have more onerous restrictions.
And for the record, we don't sell cheaper alcohol.
We have rates to pay. I think this was a statement made by
Josephine Guthrie from the Cancer Society.
So clubs aren't necessarily there selling cheap
alcohol.
It is possible for an entity, i.e. a club without a bar,
to apply for a special license to sell alcohol at an event with few
restrictions, including not having a duty manager present, as long as
they have someone responsible selling the alcohol.
Who is to determine how responsible that person is and how they
dispense alcohol when they, among other things, have, A,
potentially have no training, and B, no knowledge
of the act? This seems to undermine the license process and the
approved duty managers who are entrusted to
responsibly sell and supply alcohol within the law.
We are not one of the 23 hotspot suburbs,
and I'm not sure how many clubs have submitted, but perhaps
they're not proactive operators like we are.
So
I'm just trying to point out how
some of these rules and regulations are just inhibiting
the administration and the operation of clubs.
The opening hours, which I've put in my submission as well,
are also an issue.
I would like to see clubs be allowed to stay open till 10:00
PM at night in line with the current residential zoning
planning rules.
At the moment, if a club wants to change its
hours of license that it operates,
we are subjected to having to submit a resource consent,
which we're not going to get much change out of
$11,000 to begin with to apply for that
process. And in that process, we have to submit a certificate of
title, a floor plan, a survey,
and pay an onerous application fee.
And I can't see the relevance of any of that if the club
is as it was and has been passed as a
entity that can hold a license, has got any relevance to how long it
stays open for. Let the entities who are
currently assessing club licenses do their job,
and they should assess whether the club can actually stay open
till 12:00 PM. And I note that there
were changes to say that clubs can't operate after 1:00 AM.
I don't disagree with that, but I do disagree with the onerous,
inappropriate process that clubs have currently to
apply to change their hours of operation.
Clubs are generally a responsible environment.
They have
a duty manager present.
So,
have a bit more faith in the system that we are supposed to be
adhering to,
please.
Right. Hey, thank you, Jackie. Jackie from Mia, I think.
Yeah.
Talking about rules, I've got Mr. Todd Stevenson.
Oh, love a good rule. Hi, Jackie. Thank you.
Hi.
And I will let Nicole McKee know that you made a submission.
But my question was, we haven't actually had anyone submit on this point around the
opening hours. It's kind of interesting.
No.
So what, in your experience, has been the issues that you've encountered with
this
wanting to have a
longer opening hour period and the issues around that?
Okay. So,
we were formerly a bowling club, and the initial
license that was applied for our club, like a lot of these
clubs, particularly the older clubs, the bowling clubs and
cricket clubs and so forth.
When the license was first applied for, it was
during an era where people's lifestyles were very different and
oursRather annoyingly from my point
of view, is we are restricted to stay
open till 9:00 PM.
Which means that every time we want to have a club dinner
or a movie night or a quiz night,
when I've said that out loud, even you must
recognize that 9:00 PM is pretty restrictive.
Mm.
And so I think clubs, as a matter of course, all of
the clubs around me, cricket clubs, rugby clubs, et cetera,
are allowed to stay open till
12:30 at night most nights. Okay? And when I made
inquiries about how I could actually move with the times, if you
like, I was told that if I wanted to match
those hours that my peer clubs have, I would
need to submit a resource consent, which is-
Mm
... a completely onerous process.
I've submitted many resource consents in my life, and I cannot see the
relevance as to how that is going
to affect how we operate as a club selling
alcohol. It's not going to change how responsible we are or
irresponsible we are. It's just a layer of
bureaucracy that is very expensive for a small
club. And I'm saying,
come up with a simple form that we can fill out,
and let that go through to the health officer,
the police. And the police when they do our check for our
license renewal, will know if
we have had any complaints against us.
And that is the opportunity for that panel who assess our
license to actually reject us on that
basis. But don't slap us if we haven't been
bad.
Oh, okay.
You got another one?
Oh, no, just to say thank you for that.
Well, that's an interesting point, so we can look at that.
And I'm assuming you have very good relationships with your neighbors
around the club.
Actually, both of our neighbors are members of the club.
Well, that's one way to have good relationships.
Thank you, Jackie.
Yeah.
Ms. Kahu Carter.
Hi, Jackie. Kahu Carter here. I actually grew up just up the road from
you, so it's nice to be talking about the North Shore.
But do you play pétanque?
And
we did play pétanque, actually, but not at the club.
I know that bowling clubs, pétanque clubs build that community,
and before my father-in-law died, that was a huge
part of what brought him joy and community, was being part of his
pétanque club. So thank you for that.
And you've been very
clear in what you're asking for. So we could
definitely go away and talk about that.
What I wanted to know is, have you had a chance to look at any other parts of the
legislation? And are there any other parts of it that you
disagree with?
You mean the proposed legislation?
That's correct.
Okay.
Because I
studied ... In fact, I found it quite terrifying.
I studied for the manager's certificate, and
I
had to get across all of the rules and regulations to pass
that certificate. I was interviewed for that certificate.
And our club pays a fee, which
for our license every year. And I would be happy for that fee to be
increased, to be honest with you, if we could cut through and
get rid of some of the things that I've just talked about.
I do disagree with being
allow hairdressers and barbers to sell
alcohol,
for the reason that
I don't believe that it's very fair that some
parties, as in clubs and restaurants, et cetera,
have to
pass these interviews and be across the
legislation, and these people potentially don't have to jump through
the same hoops.
Yes.
And I do object to clubs, because I am
aware of clubs getting a
special license to have a one-off event to sell alcohol.
I do object to that. Go out and get a license properly,
and get somebody to be certified to sell alcohol
responsibly. Because it's just contradictory
to trying to get people to be responsible.
I've bothered to
go through the process. My club is operating correctly.
I can say that because I'm the president and the duty manager.
But don't
let people have half a shoe in the door.
Get them to be across the laws before they are allowed to handle
alcohol.
Okay, thank you. Hey, just last question.
The 20 working days to process a special license,
is that in the Sale of Alcohol
Act?
Yes.
Or where is that? That's a requirement in there.
It is. So,
just to clarify,
that's obviously if you've got a corporate hire, an insurance
company, they want to come and play pétanque and have some lunch and have
a fun day at the club. Because they're not members, we're obliged to
apply for a special license.
Yeah. Okay.
If it's for a memorial or for a funeral,
then there is a dispensation for that, and if you
lodge the application and state that it's for that
purpose, then they will rush it through.
But
I would say we reject up from five to 10
hires a year because we get approached
for a function, and we can't fulfill the 20
days. And look, I know there's plenty of clubs who just
fudge it anyway.And they don't submit for the special license.
They just have the event anyway. We're not one of those clubs.
All right. Hey, thank you. Lovely to hear from you, Jackie, from-
Thank you very much for your time
... talking. Okay, cool. Right. Now we've got Nathan
Cowie there. I see you online.
Good morning. How are you?
Kia ora. Can you--
I'm very well, thank you. Can you hear me?
We can, and we've got five minutes with you. So we've read your submission.
So if you want to save some questions, just
hit the high notes.
Cool. Great. Thank you very much,
Chair Bailey. So my name is Nathan Cowie.
So I have a
background in public health. I also have a background
as an alcohol harm survivor.
So when I was 14 years, through my own design,
I created an opportunity to go somewhere and drink alcohol, and
the worst thing happened.
I won't go into it, but that was when I was 14 years old.
Twenty-eight years later,
vivid flashbacks came back and I realized that I had PTSD,
post-traumatic stress disorder, and the what I call the sad
trifecta that went along with it, substance abuse.
Over the last few years, I've been dealing with the wreckage and
recovery. But also to my
background in public health, so I've worked as a
researcher in alcohol and tobacco control.
I've worked in health promotion, advocacy, and I've been an active
participant in community regulatory and policy affairs.
I'm also an active objector and also appear in
licensing hearings as a witness. So I'm here today in
the Manukau Council Chambers. I'll be appearing later as a
witness on an application to renew
an off license in Otara Town Centre.
So I wanted to talk to you about right of reply primarily.
So I live in Bokworth, and
the liquor store 400 meters away from my house,
they've been caught selling to minors.
And in our community, we had a tragedy last year where
a young man, 16 years old, was served alcohol multiple times
before dying in a car crash, a single vehicle car
crash.
So on that day, there were systemic failures to prevent
sales to minors.
Him and his mates were served multiple times and
were not once asked for ID.
They were 16 and 17 years old and the worst
happened. He got a death sentence.
For me, for my trauma, I got a life sentence.
So maybe I was lucky.
So I've objected to the license down the bottom of the hill
where they had failed a CPO. They'd served their 48-hour suspension.
And then about 59 days after that,
their other store in Tauranga with the same ownership and
the same directors, they also failed a CPO.
So clearly,
the message didn't get through.
So
I've objected to this license and also contacted other people from the
community.
A church, an organization that
helps young people who are falling through the cracks,
and someone from the board and the principal of the local
college, which has a very wide catchment area.
So we objected to that license.
We did receive a response from the applicant's
agent.
This did not cover the substantive issues, in particular
the requests for conditions that would strengthen
systems to prevent alcohol sales to minors.
We were asking for
a bank stop where
the bank would decline card transactions that were coming from a
card that was belonging to a minor.
We were asking for ID scanners and also to change the
designation of the premises from supervised to
restricted.
These issues were not addressed. Some other issues that I raised were
mischaracterized. I responded to that
response from the applicant's agent,
and I didn't get a further response.
What we did get, however,
a few weeks later,
not from the applicant's agent, this time from their lawyer, was a
strikeout application
essentially wanting to
remove all of our objections. And when
it's a case of this business has sold to minors,
they've been promoting alcohol not within the rules
contrary to Section 237, which is irresponsible promotion of
alcohol,
and they've also breach of the Auckland Signs
By-law.
For them to want to strike us out rather than have
the issues ventilated in a hearing,
it's pretty sad really that they didn't want to address the issues.
And were the issues struck out?
Well,
fortunately, I know some lawyers, so I had
my barrister
prepare a response.
The general consensus was that particular strikeout application was quite
weak.
But I've been around the traps a few times,
so I know how to handle myself in these affairs.
But other members of the community might not, and they might find that
incredibly intimidating. First the
contact from the agent,
and then the contact from the lawyer.
And this allUsually goes through the council licensing inspector,
which is the proper way to do it. So,
this proposal to have a right of reply embedded in
statute is just frankly unnecessary.
It's not fixing a problem because this
already happens.
All right. Nathan, we're just about out of time.
I'll leave it there. Yeah.
Yeah. I think we're out of time.
But hey, thank you for your personal account, and that's very helpful.
Hopefully the Wentworth Police are also involved in the issues that you
raise.
Because it sounds also like a case of better monitoring.
Yeah. So in terms of the tragedy that
occurred, there has been some accountability
for the sales that occurred on the day.
There's been a cancellation and two suspensions for the
premises involved.
Good to hear.
Would like a bit more support on
some of the other issues with other premises that have failed CPOs as well.
All right. Hey, thank you. Lovely to talk to you this morning.
Thank you, Andrew.
Right. Now we've got
Dr Liz Gordon. I think you're there. I thought I saw you, Liz.
Kia ora.
Good morning. How are you?
I'm good, thank you. Whoops, sorry.
Now we've got five minutes with you, Doctor.
Thank you very much. My name's Liz Gordon.
I'm a lawyer and community navigator supporting communities who want to
object to alcohol licenses in Ōtautahi, Christchurch,
and also throughout the country. I want to concentrate in my brief
time on objections under Section 102,
who gets to be an objector, and the right of reply, and I'd like to
talk also about hairdressers, but I probably won't get a chance to
do that.
So the aim of these changes is to put additional barriers in place
to make it harder for the general community to object to alcohol
licenses.
In broad, alcohol industry is 80% owned by
foreign multinationals interested in exporting profits.
Annual sales in New Zealand are estimated to be approximately $6 to $7
billion a year. And as you hear,
the social and economic
financial costs of alcohol harm have been
estimated in the range of $7 to $9 billion a year, and of course, there
are many, many non-financial costs of
the harm caused by alcohol, too. The ability of
communities to object to alcohol licenses is a key
scheme of the Act. Since
the 2023 changes, people have been able to
object when they want to as of right.
They have not been queuing up at the doors to do so.
The reason given
in
your explanation
of the change to Section 102 to make it harder
for people to object is so that vexatious
litigants from Invercargill cannot object to licenses in
Taupō. So I rung my mate Brian in Taupō, because I work in Taupō
now and again, and I said, "Oh, how many vexatious litigants from Invercargill have
objected to licenses in Taupō?" And of course, the answer was zero.
In other words, this change was built on a straw
person, and yet it's going to affect and upset a lot of people.
Can I give you one example? Mr Paul McGuire,
whose daughter Cass was killed in a hit-and-run by a young
man who was allowed to get drunk at the Johnstonville Rugby
Club, would not be able to object to the renewal of that
license under
this new legislation. At the moment, because anyone can object.
So there's lots of
non-residential reasons why people object to licenses, and
Paul McGuire should be able to object and have his say.
Doesn't mean the license will be lost. It may or may not be lost.
But he should be able to have his say.
Communities object to less than 2% of licenses.
That does not suggest out-of-control behavior, but a measured
response. 1,070 license
applications in 2018 to
2025 in Auckland, and of those,
only 37 was a climb. This is not out of
control. This is a very measured approach.
People hate objecting. They hate speaking to licenses.
It's really distressing for them, and very, very
few people do it unless they need to.
So
three particular
barriers will be produced by this new legislation.
The first is that there will
need to be a process of certification for objectors
to obtain status to object. How will local
councils implement this? Will they have to go through each one and make people
certify that they live within the area, or what will
happen in relation to that? Secondly, what is a district?
If we're talking council areas, these range from a few thousand to
Auckland's district, Auckland City, which is nearly two million people.
Is this sensible? Will it be effective?
And finally, how will the one-kilometer radius clause be invoked?
When will it be invoked? The alcohol industry will want it invoked in
every single objection. I know this because I've worked with those people all the
time. They'll say, "Oh, well, in this case, it needs to be the one kilometer, not
the whole district. Obviously, only people within one kilometer are affected,"
blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. So we get into fights again against
objectors. Look, I would love to have half an hour with you to tell
you all my hairy stories about objectors and why they're
absolute community champions that the Parliament should be
glad to own and support instead of listening to the
multinationalAlcohol industry were just saying
to you all, "No, we can't have objectors.
They're ruining the industry." Well, the industry is not ruined,
and really bad licenses, only a very few are
getting turned down, and we need to continue the settings the way they
are to support community participation.
That's all I've got time for.
Hey, thank you, Liz. We're out of time, but very helpful.
Your submission lays it out beautifully, actually, so
we've seen those.
Pity we didn't get to hear your hearing moment.
I used to be you once, Andrew.
Did you? Yeah, I'm not sure.
Before we moved.
I know. Hey, thank you very much this morning.
Ka kite.
Thank you.
Okay. Bye-bye.
Right.
We're going back into private session,
everyone. We have
to have Dash-